okay good morning everyone um we are
Switching gears this morning we have
finished our uh discussion about the
admittedly brief history of evolutionary
Robotics and we're moving on to a new uh
module in the course open challenges in
evolutionary robotics since the field uh
is so young there are a number of
questions about how to go about
appropriately evolving and automatically
designing autonomous machines that still
don't have good answers to them as I
mentioned at the beginning of the course
I hope some of you enter the field as
well and maybe some of you will find
good answers to some of these uh open
problems or open
challenges uh we're going to spend uh
two lectures lecture 13 and lecture 14
looking at uh a conceptual issue in the
field which is how to map genotypes onto
good phenotypes what do we mean by that
we haven't really talked about this too
much yet just to refresh your memory the
genotype is the data structure that
encodes the blueprint of uh the robot uh
Andor its neural controller in the
previous uh lecture by petal Locomotion
we just looked like looked at a genotype
which was a vector that contained uh 12
numbers specifying aspects of the
robot's uh body and a whole bunch of
other numbers specifying the synaptic
weights of its neural controller turns
out that there's lots of different ways
to turn uh genotypes into phenotypes and
a lot of those ways sorry and the
phenotype is of course the robot's uh
body and how it moves Form and Function
that's
phenotype there's a lot of different
ways to transform genotype into
phenotype and some are better than
others um throughout this course so far
we've been looking at sort of the most
basic direct way to turn genotype into
phenotype we take every single number
and use that to set some parameter of
the robot's body or brain uh not so much
in lecture 13 but in lecture 14 we're
going to start to look at some more
complicated ways of taking the genetic
information stored in the robot and
turning it into the robot itself and how
that can go wrong and how to make it
better with an algorithm that's quite
famous in our field that's called the
neat
algorithm in lecture 13 we're going to
look at sort of a subset of uh the
genotype to phenotype uh mapping problem
which is that usually when we take
genetic information and and turn it into
uh the synaptic weights of a
robot uh that neural network is very
non-modular meaning that the synaptic
weights are all nonzero and every all of
the information from every sensor goes
to every motor or every hidden neuron
and all the information in every hidden
neuron goes to every motor neuron so any
incoming information to the robot
quickly spreads everywhere throughout
the brain of the robot as we've seen in
many of these neural
controllers uh most brains for our robot
every neuron is almost connected to
every other
neuron and even if not every neuron is
connected to every every other neuron
information sort of bleeds throughout
the brain of the robot and it's very
hard for it to divide and conquer to
break up problems into sub problems in
its head and then execute accordingly
that's known as the lack of modularity
problem and we're going to look at one
solution to this in the field which is
to uh allow Evolution to make more
modular brains so uh in starting lecture
13 today we're going to talk about
modularity first and then modularity as
it relates to robots uh modularity is of
course a very uh important Concept in
many many fields it pops up in different
places because it's such a general and
important idea um it's got different
definitions in different
fields but the underlying idea of
modularity in all of those fields is the
same we've got some machine or in our
case a neural network and we want to see
tighter coupling within modules and less
coupling across
modules an obvious example of this is
any phys complicated physical machine
like a like a car if you open up the
hood there are modules there is an
engine there are the brakes there is the
battery there's the windshield system
and so on by making a car in a modular
fashion you can obviously replace or fix
one part of the car uh without
disrupting all the rest of the car one
part can start to wear out a break down
that doesn't necessarily cause the car
to break as a whole it seems so obvious
that we would build that way that often
we don't even
realize that modularity is important and
that it's very easy in some cases to
start to make machines that aren't
modular imagine a car where if you get a
small scrape uh on the windshield the
entire car breaks not an ideal way to to
do
things another obvious example of
modularity is OB object-oriented
programming objectoriented programming
was invented to make it easier for
coders to create modular uh code so a
module and object-oriented programming
is obviously of often referred to as an
object and the reason why we try and get
better at object-oriented programming is
the same reason as for the car we want
to make sure that if we fix or modify
one small part of the code within one
module that doesn't necessarily break
all the other parts of the system so in
any modular system a well-written
modular piece of code or a car change
your removal of a module has relatively
little effect on overall performance
except of course if it plays a critical
role if something goes wrong with your
engine uh while you're riding a car
you're out of
luck okay so again just to reinforce
this idea if you're comfortable with
object-oriented programming you can skip
over this slide but for those that are
still learning about object Orient ented
programming it's worth reinforcing this
idea of
modularity in good objectoriented
programming we try and hide the internal
complexity of an object or a class from
the other objects or classes that call
its functions so going to skip over
pyrosim shape here for a moment um
you're in the process of modularizing
your code or you've recently done it um
here's one way you could do it you could
create a class called robot and inside
that class robot there are three
functions that other objects other
modules can call create draw and delete
the robot now as you all know now know
by by heart um there's a lot of internal
complexity to a robot it's got a neural
network controller we have to Define
aspects of its bodies its joints we need
to tell the robot how to move how to
sense and so on but from something like
an evolutionary algorithm that's just
calling a simul to create and draw and
delete that robot it might not that that
other piece of code or that other module
doesn't necessarily need to know about
all this internal complexity we want to
hide it from there so if you want to
make a change to the robot you can make
it in here and you don't need to make a
change in the evolutionary algorithm or
the fitness function you can divide and
conquer okay so as we start to uh
consider modularity in robotics and in
evolutionary robotics in particular we
need to pay attention to two different
kinds of modularity modularity in
general is
useful but when it comes to neural
networks uh that control robots there's
two kinds of modularity we can build
into or look for in a neural network the
first one and the most obvious one is
structural
modularity and to uh motivate the
description of structural modularity
let's have a look at a figure we've
looked at before this is a figure from
The Experiment where there was a small
humanoid robot that was shaking the
block left and right and then up and
down and forward and backwards and so on
in that case that robot had a whole
bunch of little motor Primitives left
right left right up down up down and so
on and in this figure just to remind you
you can think of these little colored
squiggles as the actions of the motor
neurons that produce that little motor
primitive so green is Left Right red is
up down blue is forward and back and so
on
the investigators could have created a
structurally modular Network in which
they made little uh Bunches of neurons
connected together that would produce uh
Left Right motion of the robot then they
could have created a separate little
neural module where they made a subset
of neurons and wired them all up that
together would produce up down motion
and so on and they might have included
little or no synapses connected ing
these little neural modules together the
robot could dream up in its head these
different ways of
moving and then we could imagine a
fourth and final neural module another
little collection of neurons that would
turn on or
off uh this gate selection module that
would turn on and off which of these
little ideas in the robot's head were
allowed to grab onto the neurons and the
robot would actually execute what it was
thinking about
this idea also relates back to the
subsumption
architecture that we talked about at the
beginning of the
course uh and that's inside AR Roomba if
you have one so that's structural
modularity we've got a whole bunch of
neurons but some sets of subsets of
neurons are wired up tightly together
and there are little little to no
connections between those neural modules
that's structural modularity if you
don't have structural modularity if you
have a neural network and in which every
neuron is wired up with a synapse to
every other neuron then as the number of
neurons n grows the number of synaptic
connections grows quadratically grows as
as a function of n SAR every neuron has
to be wired up to every other neuron
including itself so lack of
modularity lack of structural modularity
is problematic because as the robot
becomes more complicated and its neural
network controller has more and more
neurons in it the number of synapses
grows
incredibly an Evol and an evolutionary
algorithm is going to have to find a way
to set all of those weights correctly
the more synapses there are the harder
it is for evolution to do
this there's a second type uh of
modularity which we saw actually when we
talked about this humanoid robot which
is functional modularity in this case uh
we might not necessarily have a network
that's structurally modular so here's my
little cartoon of a neural network down
here that is not structurally modular um
you don't really see tightly
interconnected uh neural modules every
neuron is more or less connected to the
same other subset of a bunch of other
neurons it's kind of a
mess however this network as we saw the
neurons that can change their values
quickly that have low time constants
can be pushed by the slow neurons the
neurons that have high magnitude time
constants these purple neurons change
their values slowly over time these slow
neurons can push the fast neurons into
different discrete patterns the red
pattern then if the purple pattern or
sorry the purple neurons the slow ones
can push the fast these fast neurons
into the green pattern and then if the
purple neurons change their value they
push the fast neurons out of the green
pattern and into the red pattern and so
on so we get functional modules it's the
same neurons but they're producing
different discrete patterns at different
points in time that's functional
modularity in this particular lecture we
are not going to talk about functional
modularity we're going to focus mostly
on structural modularity but it's
important to keep this uh this
distinction in mind
okay so how does modularity or lack of
modularity why is this a problem for uh
evolutionary robotics so again we might
not we might not we we probably don't
want to have a robot in which every
neuron is attached to every other neuron
uh it's difficult and we would also like
the robot's Behavior itself to be
modular we would like uh to we would
like to break the task for the robot
down into several subtasks like we just
saw here into several motor Primitives
and maybe we would like to assign a
subnetwork to each task in the humanoid
robot uh experiment we saw um the
investigators wanted to avoid this idea
but for our purposes let's keep things
simple there's K different things we
want the K different subtasks we want
the robot to do and we want to create K
different neural modules that allow the
robot to achieve those subtasks and if
the robot is able to juggle these K
different subtasks and and execute them
in the right place at the right time the
robot will end up performing whatever
the overall task is that we want it to
perform correctly yeah sometimes that's
a better way to go than just sort of uh
create a fitness function that selects
for a very complicated task without
breaking it down into subtasks and hope
for the best um the robot or The
evolutionary algorithm is often not a
able to evolve that uh competency for
the robot because its neural network
controller is non-modular every neuron's
wired up to everything else and the
robot has a very hard time breaking
tasks down into
subtasks so we could ask the roboticist
before before evolving the robot to
actually do this try and bait break the
task down into several subtasks there's
problems with
that so alternatively we could ask the
evolutionary algorithm to try and not
only evolve synaptic weights for our
neural network but also to cut the
network into pieces actually discover a
good way to modularize the neural
network controller of the robot to make
it easier for that evolved robot to uh
execute these subtasks
independently
okay however uh thinking about thinking
is misleading the roboticist and the
robot may have different ideas about
what counts uh as a behavior and ways to
break down the problem so um again this
idea of thinking about thinking of
misleading it's got lots of different
reasons here's one of them which is when
we look at or we think about a
hypothetical robot that we want to solve
a particular problem we are actually
looking either literally or in our head
at the robot from a distance and this is
called the distal perspective of
behavior we're thinking about what the
the robot's behavior is or what it
should be from a distance and we
actually saw this idea when we first
talked about brenberg Vehicles when we
looked at that first simple brenberg
vehicle that had One Sensor One motor
and one wire and it was moving faster or
slower through warm or cold water
brenberg told us that when we look at
that robot from a distance we might say
that it's alive it looks like it's
thinking about or it feels cold and so
on things start to go wrong
when we start to reason about a machine
or even an organism from a
distance just to reinforce that idea uh
imagine this very simple robot here two
wheels and five proximity sensors
emanating out from the front of the
robot and at one point in time we as a
distant Observer see the robot drive
past a
cylinder and at another point in time we
see exactly the same robot drive past
this Cube here this block we might say
there's the robot driving past a
cylinder and there's a robot driving
past the block those two English
sentences those descriptions of the
robot's Behavior are different which
might lead us erroneously to think that
the robot is experiencing two different
things in those two different
situations you can see from the way that
I've drawn this cartoon that from the
robot's perspective what it feels at
these two different points in time is is
identical the five numbers arriving at
the five sensor neurons have exactly the
same five values the lengths of these
proximity sensor beams are the same and
you can see that down here so from the
proximal perspective proximal meaning
close by so literally in the robot shoes
seeing the world through the robot's
eyes or through its sensors these two
situations are identical so if we start
to think about these two things as
different situations that might lead us
to break the tasks down into deal with
the cylinder and deal with the block at
least in this simple example at these
two frozen instances of time the robot
cannot deal with the cylinder and the
block differently because the robot
considers itself to be in an identical
situation in these two cases so it might
be that what we think of as roboticists
is a good way to to break down a problem
into manageable parts and create neural
modules for the robot to deal with those
different T subtasks is not an
appropriate way for the evolutionary
algorithm to break down the task in
front of the robot into sub modules and
allow the robot to solve
it okay so we're going to look at
actually an old experiment we're going
back towards the beginning of
evolutionary robotics this was in about
the mid90s this experiment was conducted
the researchers asked the following
question how do we enable an
evolutionary algorithm to autonomously
discover discover neural modules
appropriate to the task they're going to
set the robot a relatively complicated
uh task which is to pick up all the
objects inside an arena move towards the
wall of an arena and drop those objects
off over the wall of the Arena that's a
pretty complicated task especially for a
little simple keer a hockey puck type
robot down
here so they're going to create an
evolutionary algorithm and a particular
type of neural network in which the
evolutionary algorithm can easily cleave
this neural network into different parts
and those different parts can control
the robots uh
Motors to solve this
task okay so remember that we're in this
uh module of the module of this course
in which we're talking about open
challenges
the challenge here again is evolution
tends to make nonmodular neural networks
everything tends to be wired up with
everything else the solution here is to
create or evolve particular kinds of
neural networks to give evolutionary
algorithm an option an option to create
modular neural
networks okay so um in this case our
robot has seven sensors there are six
infrared sensors so again it's got uh
it's able to detect things nearby on its
left side front side and right side with
these six numbers and it's got a seventh
little laser inside uh between the two
pincers of its gripper here and this is
going to be our light barrier sensor
when the robot goes to pick up an object
in its environment like a sugar cube for
example that object is going to pass
between the two pincers and break the
laser beam and that number is going to
be sent into the seventh sensor neuron
the robot is going to be equipped with
four motor neurons one motor neuron
controls the left motor the other motor
neuron controls the right motor neuron
the third motor neuron this is a little
bit different from what we've seen
before the third motor neuron is going
to trigger a preet motor primitive which
is object pickup when the third motor
neuron fires when it obtains a nonzero
value the the the Kea is going to do
this going to do
this when the fourth motor neuron
obtains a a non-zero value the robot is
going to do this when the third and the
fourth motor neuron are quiet they're
zero or near quiet the robot is neither
trying to pick up or release so this is
a little bit uh different from something
we've seen before the first two motor
neurons the for first two motor neurons
are controlling the wheels as the speed
of the wheels as we've seen before third
and fourth motor neurons trigger two
different kinds of motor
Primitives okay so let's think about the
task pick up all basically clean up the
arena pick up all the objects drop them
over the wall and out of the Arena I
want you to think for a moment about the
way you might divide and conquer this uh
task if we placed you in a big arena and
you had a bunch of jobs to do you might
for example break down what you need to
do into 1 2 3 4 five six different
behavioral modules the first one might
be move around and avoid walls let's
imagine that you're doing this task in
Pitch uh Blackness so you got to sort of
move around and find these objects if
you bump into walls uh move away from
them so we could further decompose this
first behavioral module into two subm
modules if none of your sensors in front
of you were firing you're reaching out
in the dark with your hands and waving
them around if you don't feel anything
move forward if you hit something on
your left turn to your right if you hit
something on your right turn to your
left and so on what we're describing
here is the coward brenberg vehicle so
we could imagine sort of the coward
controlling this robot uh so that it
moves around and uh turns away when it
bumps into the wall can imagine a second
uh a second behavioral module which is
if you or the robot happens to move in
in the in such a way that suddenly there
is an object between your two hands or
in the case of the robot it's two
pincers uh recognize the object and move
yourself so that you're ready for pickup
and then trigger your third behavioral
module some part of your brain that
coordinates the lifting of the object up
over your head now that you're holding
it uh now that you're holding it run a
fourth behavioral module this one might
be a modified brenberg vehicle that
causes you to move forward but not turn
away from a wall once you get to one
sixth behavioral module when you
recognize a wall position yourself right
up so that you're uh touching the wall
uh with your front then the seventh and
final behavioral module drop the object
over the the
wall okay you could imagine creating a
robot with seven
different uh neural modules in it that
if those any one of those modules is
allowed to control the
motors the robot will do that particular
Behavior that's one possible way we
could decompose the task you can
probably guess from my buildup to this
that in a moment we're going to see an
evolutionary algorithm divide this task
into a bunch of subtasks and they are
absolutely not what you might
expect okay um one of the elegant things
about this experiment that I like is
that the uh investigators snuck up on
this question about how to evolve robots
with modular brains by uh evolving the
robot to perform this task with an
incrementally complicated set of neural
networks this is not like the bipedal
locomotion lecture we just saw where
they're going to evolve for a while
pause make a change to the network and
then keep going they're going to do
separate evolutionary runs they're going
to evolve the robot uh they're going to
evolve robots with these kinds of brains
and see how well the robot does at the
cleanup task then they're going to reset
everything and start all over again
they're going to start Evolution all
over again with robots equipped with
these kinds of brains this kind of
cognitive architecture and evolve the
synaptic weights of this cognitive Arch
chitecture see how well robots evolve to
do the cleanup task when they're armed
with brains of type B redo it all again
evolve robots with brains of type c and
d and so on okay let's have a look at
these four different cognitive
architectures brains of type A are kind
of the simplest thing you could possibly
imagine we've got our
seven uh we've got our seven uh 1 2 3 4
5 six seven sensors uh down here seven
right yes six infrared sensors and one
light barrier sensor seven sensors and
each one of the seven sensors is
connected by a synapse to one of the
four Motors so this is a feed forward
Network the synapses are feeding forward
from sensors to Motors no hidden neurons
so no ability to remember anything uh no
nonlinear transformations of sensory
information into motor output and so on
okay next neural network architecture uh
of type B they've got the same seven
sensor neurons and the same four motor
neurons but they embed four hidden
neurons between them connect up every
sensor to every hidden neuron and
connect up every hidden neuron to every
motor neuron with a synapse no recurrent
connections here so robots armed with
brains of type B uh can evolve nonlinear
transformations of sensation into action
but they cannot remember anything there
are no recurrent connections
here cognitive architecture C we've got
our 1 2 3 4 five six seven neurons down
here and our sorry our seven sensor
neurons down here our four motor neurons
up here and we've got 1 2 3 4 hidden
neurons like we had in b but they've
been redrawn here uh we haven't seen
sensor hidden and motor neurons drawn
like this before you'll notice that uh
in this case all of the seven sensor
neurons are connected directly to the
motor neurons so direct uh direct
influence of sensation on on action is
possible in this cognitive
architecture these seven sensor neurons
each one of them also has a a synapse
that connects conect it to one of the
first two hidden
neurons the first two hidden
neurons have recurrent connections to
the third and fourth hidden neuron so in
type c we've got some recurrent
connections within the hidden neurons
which means that the robot has the
ability to remember if that's useful for
this task and the third and the fourth
hidden neuron have synapses that connect
them to
uh back to the two hidden neurons so
we've got a recurrent or Loops inside of
the Hidden layer and the third and the
fourth hidden neuron have synapses that
connect them to each of the four motor
neurons so this is a slightly different
wiring diagram to what we've seen before
but basically something we've seen
before sensor hidden and motor neurons
and we've got recurrent Connections in
case memory is
useful uh cognitive architecture D this
is the investigators the human
investigators attempt to force
modularity on the neural network and
thus on the robots Behavior we've got
our seven sensors down here and we can
see that each of the sensors is
connected to one of the four motor
neurons in motor module a and the same
seven sensor neurons are connected to
each of the four motor neurons in motor
module B
if you can imagine a robot equipped with
this uh neural network and it's driving
around in the arena all of these seven
numbers are turning on and off and
changing as the robot senses changes in
its environment and that is lighting up
the four neurons in each of the two
modules
differently in a sense robots equipped
with brain type D is are always holding
two different ideas about what to do
here in module a this is the robot
thinking oh maybe I'll rotate a motor
the left wheel like this and the right
wheel like this and I'm not going to
pick up and I'm not going to drop or
maybe I should spin both Wheels
backwards while I trigger the drop uh
motor primitive at any point in time
robots equipped with uh sensor
D are able to uh are are able it's
thinking about these two these two ideas
which of these two ideas which of these
four numbers are actually sent to the
motors again the human investigators
decided what that should be they decided
that when the gripper is
empty these four motor neurons grab
control of the motors and when the
gripper is full when the robot is when
there when that light beam is broken
there is either an object between the
pincers or the robot has is actually
holding an object these four motor
neurons grab control of the motor so
again this is kind of like subsumption
architecture the robot is holding
multiple ideas in its head
simultaneously and from moment to moment
these two different ideas can actually
seize control of the robot and make that
thought a
reality okay so just a review in neural
module a no modularity no hidden neurons
U neural uh brains of type B we've got
hidden neurons no modularity over here
we have memory and hidden neurons in
brain C but no modularity and in in uh
brain type D there is human enforced
modularity we're now going to look at
brain e the fifth and final type of
cognitive architecture they tried to
evolve uh on their robots this takes a
little bit to uh digest so from a high
level um this particular cognitive
architecture was designed by the human
investigators to make it easy for The
evolutionary algorithm to cut this
neural network in different ways to
basically if it's helpful and it may not
be if it's helpful for evolution to uh
evolve modularity or behavioral
modularity for this robot it can do so
in a flexible manner let's see how this
works sensor layer looks pretty familiar
we've got our seven uh sensor neurons
down here and you'll notice that there
are four groups of neurons up here here
each group corresponds to one of the
four actions spin the left uh wheel at
some speed spin the right wheel at some
speed trigger the pickup Behavior or
trigger the release Behavior there are
four neurons assigned assigned to each
of those quote unquote motor neurons
those ultimate actions that the robot
performs within that group you can see
there are two black and two white
neurons the white neurons neurons
correspond to Output neurons we'll talk
about those in a moment and the two
black neurons correspond to to selector
neurons Okay so we've got a total of 16
neurons at the output or at the motor
layer if you squint really hard you
should be able to see that each uh each
sensor neuron has a synapse connecting
to each of the 16 output neurons so
every sensor neuron is connected to each
of the 16 output neurons so if we drop
brain Type e into the robot and the
robot starts to move
around the Val the seven numbers
arriving at the sensor layer are
changing and the values of all 16 output
neurons are also changing as a function
of whatever these synaptic weights
happen to be okay at every moment in
time uh the the code for the robot looks
with uh visits each of these four groups
and when it's visiting a particular
group the code looks at the values of
the two selector neurons if the value of
the first selector neuron is greater
than the value of the second selector
neuron so if this value is greater than
this value the value of this output
neuron is sent to the left motor if the
value of the right hand selector neuron
is greater than the value of the leftand
selector neuron then the value of the
right hand output neuron is sent to the
left
motor so that's why these pairs are
called selector neurons they select
which module which neural module in here
it takes control of the motor at any
time so there are two different neural
modules for each of the four possible
motor Primitives the four things that
the robot can do so if we think of the
state of the neural network as which
selector neuron uh which selector neuron
is allowing control of uh of the of that
particular motor primitive how many
possible states are
there within each of the four group
groups there's four possible States
either the left part of that group is in
control or the right part of that group
is in control so we can imagine
assigning a binary value to this group
and a binary value zero or one to this
group 0 or one to this group or 0o to
one at this group at any moment in time
as the robot is behaving and since we
have four binary numbers we can imagine
that in this case uh the right part of
the group is in charge one left part is
in control zero left zero left zero for
example so 1 0 0 0 at another point in
time this uh one is in control zero is
in control one is in control zero is in
control one 0 1 zero that's another
combination of States inside the brain
of the robot we've got four binary
numbers how many states are there there
are two to the four possible States for
this robot it's morning here 2 4 2 * 2
is 4 4 * 2 is 8 8 * 2 is 16 2 4 16
possible States for the robot these 60
these different neural modular different
neural modules can grab sees control of
the motors at any given time
okay okay so again just to review
they're going to perform five sets of
experiments they're going to evolve
robots with a brain robots with B brains
robots with C brains robots with d
brains and robots with e brains and then
when they compare how well the robot
evolves to perform the task across these
five experiments they're going to start
to learn what is the role in this task
of internal uh internal units or uh
internal units or neurons is synonymous
with uh hidden units or hidden neurons
so if hidden neurons are useful for this
particular task which of these
experiments should be successful and
which ones shouldn't be I give you a
moment to think about
that if hidden neurons are useful then
robots equipped with brains a that lack
internal units should have a hard time
evolving to perform the task but robots
with brains b c and d should do a good
uh should do a good job at this
task you'll notice that in Type e there
actually aren't any internal
units so maybe e robots with robots
evolved with a brains and E brains
wouldn't do well but robots evolved with
B brains
crains and sorry not D brains would do
well there are also no internal units in
type D so only B and C would evolve to
succeed at the task and robots with a d
and e brains would not evolve to do well
at this task
if recurrent connections are useful for
this task so maybe memory is useful for
this task you would expect when
Evolution evolves SE brains the robot
should evolve to do better at the task
than in any of the other four
experiments finally if modularity is
useful for this task if it makes sense
for the robot to break down the task
into subtasks then a robots evolved with
a b and c brains should evolve to only
do so well at the task but maybe robots
evolved with d Andor e brains would
evolve to do well at this
task okay let's look at the actual data
here we go they created as always for
each of these five experiments they
created a population of initially random
sets of synaptic weights for however
many synapses there are in that
experiment remember there's five
experiments and as you can see for these
five different cognitive architectures
there's different numbers of
synapses they then took each one of
those sets of synaptic weights in that
initial random population took those
synaptic weights labeled the synapses of
that neural controller for the robot put
that robot into the arena and they
allowed the robot to move around uh for
200 actions so they did all of this work
um uh 200 actions you can think of this
as 200 time steps uh in the
simulation they watch what the robot did
for 200 time steps or actions or until
the robot corre until the robot actually
grabbed an object took it to the wall
and correctly released it over the far
side of the wall if that happened they
stopped the simulation uh early that's
what they Define as one Epoch they
basically give the robot armed with that
cognitive architecture and that set of
synaptic weights up to 200 time steps to
get rid of one of the
objects okay that they then took the
robot and Al uh allowed it to they moved
it to another if the robot uh if the
robot had performed 200 actions or it
had correctly released an object they
took that robot and put it to a random
place in the arena and allowed it to do
the same thing again another Epoch and
another Epoch and they did that 15 times
so the robot basically had 15
attempts to try and clean up the 1 2 3 4
five objects in its environment so you
can think of one simulation or one whole
evaluation of one set of synaptic
weights as lasting up to 200 times 15
time steps
long after that time they they they
computed the fitness for that set of
synaptic weights which is how many if
any of the objects the robot ejected
from the arena they then went to the
second set of synaptic weights the
second genotype in the
population labeled the neural controller
for the robot for that and evaluated
that neural controller on the robot for
15 epochs and they kept doing that for
each set of synaptic weights in the
population now they have a fitness value
assigned to every set of synaptic
weights in that initial random
population delete the controllers that
cause the robot to do a poor job of
cleaning up the arena make randomly
modified copies of the sets of synaptic
weights that allow the robot to do a
little bit better at cleaning up the
arena and then repeat that process all
over again for another generation and
another generation and another
generation and they did this for a
thousand Generations so we've got
evolutionary time as always on the
horizontal axis down here and up here we
have the number of successful uh epochs
how many how many of these 200 times
step uh time Windows did the robot
correctly grab and release an object
over the edge of the Arena uh I
mentioned that there are five objects in
the arena you can see that some of the
evolved controllers actually got scores
higher uh higher than five so they were
putting if the if a robot did manage to
drop an object outside the arena as that
robot was being randomly placed at a new
position to for the next Epoch they take
that object and put it back into the
arena at some random location so poor
robot it can never actually clean up the
arena it's just got to keep tossing
stuff outside the arena as we keep uh uh
dropping garbage into its
Arena okay you'll notice immediately
that robots equipped uh with brains a
never evolved to do a very good job they
could get rid of uh six objects but the
other uh the robots equipped with the
four other types of brains did much
better remember here's type A here so
this simple neural network controller or
this cognitive architecture is too
simple for this
task okay you'll notice that uh BC and D
did pretty well here's b c and d so
hidden neurons probably helps B did
better than a the only difference
between b and a is hidden neurons so
that's helpful um C did better than a so
having recurrent connections also helps
D did pretty well as well so even though
so human enforced modularity helped at
least compared to the simple neural
network but D is no better than B and C
it's they should have really labeled
these with different colors or shown
these lines differently whatever BC and
D do more or less the same so it's
useful to have hidden neurons it's
useful to have recurrence it's useful to
have modularity but this human induced
modularity is no better than just
throwing in some hidden neurons and
recurrent
connections e which is drawn in bold
here ultimately the other ones catch up
but e makes it possible for evolution to
make quick rapid progress so the clear
winner here are robots that were evolved
with cognitive architecture e and this
is the main takeaway message from
today's lecture is that at least in this
simple experiment it was better to let
Evolution discover and enforce
modularity on the brain of the robot
than it was to have the investigators
enforce modularity on the controller or
not enforce modularity at
all this plot here uh is kind of
interesting they took uh the evolved
controllers from simulation and dropped
it onto the physical keer robot and they
wanted to see how well the physical
robot did um they they counted here the
number of successful individual so they
played back the best controllers from
experiments a b c d and e these are
controllers that allow the robot to do
kind of okay or really well at the
task uh and in this case they uh counted
the number of successful individuals so
in this case in the physical case they
put five actual little five wooden pegs
not sugar cubes five little wooden pegs
and they counted how many times the
robot was able to successfully get all
five of the pegs out of the Arena they
did a bunch of
experiments uh they didn't say how oh
sorry for the best controller from the
10 replications how many right so they
played back a bunch of different
controllers from each of these five
experiments and only one of the uh
evolved controllers from experiment a
allowed the physical robot to completely
clean its
environment but the physical robot
equipped with some of the best e brains
seven of those individuals seven
different e controllers were able to uh
uh enable the physical robot to
completely clean up its environment I'm
sorry I forgot to mention uh this term
here replication so we've got five
different experiments for each one of
these experiments they ran the
evolutionary algorithm once then they
went back and created a different random
population of synaptic weights and ran
Evolution forward again for a brains and
again and again and again they ran the
evolutionary algorithm 10 times for
experiment a they replicated that
experiment another 10 times for
experiment in experiment B and so on
which gives us a total of 50 different
evolutionary runs that they
performed okay so that that gives us 10
Champions if they run Evolution 10 times
with experiment a at the end of each of
those runs they pluck out of the evolved
population the set of synaptic weights
that enabled the robot to do the best
they take the best evolved brain out of
each of those 10 trials which gives 10
champions for a 10 champions for B 10
champions for c d and e and they played
back each of those 10 Champions on the
physical robot in experiment a only one
of those 10 Champions completely cleaned
the arena in experiment B only 10 of the
B Champion or only two of the 10 B
champions the arena and so forth in
experiment e seven of the 10 e Champions
successfully clean the arena so not only
did robots equipped with EB brains
evolve quickly to do well at the
task the physical robot when armed with
those successful brains do better than
the others so just a different way of
measuring how good Evolution did at
evolving this particular behavior for
those five different types of cognitive
architectures okay so we can now uh look
at these results and go back to some of
our questions and ask very and we can
ask various questions about the results
first question you might ask is is there
a correspondence between evolved modules
and distal behaviors so we know we we're
going to look in a moment at how
evolution carved up uh how Evolution
carved up modules in E we're going to
focus on E brains for a moment the short
answer as you're going to see is that
there isn't a correspondence whatever
modularity Evolution found here and
evolution did find some modularity
because it was useful we know that it
was
useful it doesn't seem to map on what we
intuitively might think of as a good way
to carve things up into behaviors for
example
module a explore until an object is
found and then module B do what you need
to do once you found an
object okay so we're going to look uh in
to see that the answer is actually no we
can't understand the modularity that
evolution discovered we're going to look
at just one evolved controller from the
e experiments a single set of synaptic
weights this particular single set of
synaptic weights causes the controller
to switch between just two
states what do I mean by that uh in this
case Evolution uh only switched the two
modules back and forth for the right
motor so there were certain points in
time when the robot was controlled by
this set of evolved
ews in which the left output neuron was
controlling the right motor and there
were other points in time in which the
right output neuron controlled the right
motor so there were two different
modules or two different ideas that the
robot had about what to do with the
right motor and those different ideas
grabbed control of the right motor at
different
times in the other three
groups either the left selector neuron
was always greater than the right
selector
neuron
or the right selector neuron always had
a greater value than the left selector
neuron although Evolution could have
evolved these sets of synaptic weights
to switch to allow these two different
modules to control the other three
things the robot can do Evolution set
those synaptic weights to not make use
of those additional potential
modules make sense so this controller
only has two states either this idea is
controlling the right motor or this idea
is controlling the right motor and
whatever it was in the other three it
was either the left output neuron always
had control of the left motor or the
right output neuron always had control
of the left motor it's not clear in this
case makes
sense okay let's keep
going okay let's start with observing
what the robot actually does when it's
equipped with uh cognitive architecture
e and labeled with this particular sets
of synaptic weights that allows the
robot to successfully clean up the uh
environment again this experiment was
conducted in the
mid90s so no YouTube videos at this
point we're going to have to uh content
ourselves with this figure here so let
me walk you through it here's the robot
here and you can see it's two pincers
that make up its gripper so it's
pointing to the southeast at this moment
in time the squiggly line is showing you
the trajectory that this robot uh the
the trajectory of this robot while it
was controlled by this controller at
some point the robot was driving in this
direction and grabbed this object you
can see it's white now indicating that
there was an object here but they're no
longer there was an object here at the
beginning of this trial but not at the
end the robot grabbed this object came
down here and was facing the wall and
presumably dropped this object here
turned around started heading Northwest
came into contact with this object
picked it up drove uh over here and
dropped it out here it's a little hard
to see but from this trajectory but was
driving around and managed to come into
contact with these three objects at
various points in time take them to the
uh some edge of the arena and drop it
over the arena it never got to object 4
or
five
okay uh the time that it took for it to
do that is plotted on the horizontal
axis down here so this is not
evolutionary time this is plotting the
lifetime of this particular robot with
this neural
controller we're going to walk down each
of these rows in this figure one at a
time
let's let's start with uh mod up here
this is which module controls the right
motor remember that the selector neurons
here in the right motor are switching
back and forth between which which of
those two selector neurons has the
greater value causing these different
neural modules to grab the right
motor periods of time in which mod is
black that means that the right hand the
right side idea is in control of the
right
motor periods of white indicate that the
left idea is in control of the right
motor yeah so you can see you can see
the E brain switching back and forth
between these two ideas which of these
two ideas uh is translated by the robot
into reality you'll already notice that
the evolved modularity discovered by The
evolutionary algorithm looks different
from what we might have enforced as
modularity because these two modules are
f back and forth very rapidly you would
imagine that if one module corresponds
to holding the object there would be one
contiguous black band where that module
deal with a held object takes place and
then you'd expect very long contiguous
blocks of white where the robot is doing
looking for an object for example so
already our intuition is is broken here
um let's have a look at some of the
other rows here um what exactly is the
robot uh perceiving so is it is it
seeing a wall is it facing a wall or is
it facing a Target object if we look at
these black bands where it can see a
wall then it sees a Target then it's a
Target object and it sees neither a wall
nor a Target object then a Target object
again and then it's looking seeing a
wall for quite a long period of time
there's no clear correspondence between
the pattern of black and white down here
and the pattern of black and white up
here so this WT was the investigator's
first guess about what these modules
might correspond to maybe these modules
correspond to whether the robot is
looking at a wall or looking at a Target
object that's not
it here's the uh here's the speed at
which the left motor is spinning you'll
notice the left motor is spinning quite
a bit and then it slows down during this
period and slows down during this period
there's a little bit of a correspondence
between the speed of the left wheel and
the pattern of the different modules
switching on and switching back and
forth uh up here but again it's it's not
a perfect correspondence there is a
stronger correspondence between the
speed of the right motor and the
switching of the modules which kind of
makes sense because remember that these
this module these two modules are
switching back and forth and when one
switches on perhaps it causes the right
motor to do something else you can kind
of see that when the Black module is in
control the right wheel the right motor
is spinning
slower and when the white module is in
control the wheel is spinning faster
what that means again who who really
knows um then they looked at periods in
which the pickup motor primitive was
triggered here it's triggered here here
it's being triggered a little bit and so
on again no real correspondence between
when pickup is triggered and either of
these two modules so whatever this
module is it's not control pickup uh
it's not control
pickup RL is release so here's uh
release firing meaning the robot is
holding uh holding steady and then
here's a period uh here's a period in
which release is inhibited the robot is
not releasing uh the object it's a
little uh
counterintuitive so uh releases do this
and this is periods in which it's not
doing that so you can see that again
there's a little bit of a correspondence
between these white gaps here and these
white gaps up here but again there's no
clear pattern it's very difficult to try
to understand what these modules are
controlling here's the pattern of
activation of the six infrared sensors
or the proximity sensors again we can
see there's not much of a correspondence
but there's a little bit it seems more
or less that when the Black module is in
control that happens to be when the six
uh infrared sensors are stimulated so
maybe there is an intuitive pattern here
we could we could detect but but it's
not clear exactly what it
is okay here here's uh the light barrier
sensor that little beam between the two
pincers and we can see that during this
period and this period and this period
the PE the beam is broken these
correspond to the three periods during
the robot's behavior in which it's
holding one of these three objects that
it eventually jettison out of the uh
Arena again no real clear pattern there
um finally the investigators came up
with 1 2 3 4 5 6
78 situations that can occur as the
robot is cleaning up the arena uh these
are periods in which it's carrying an
object and seems to be looking for a
wall that's exactly those periods in
which it's those three periods in which
it's holding an object those candidate
or hypothetical uh those
hypothetical behavioral modules don't
seem to correspond too well to what's
going on up here here uh gripper is
empty and it's looking for an object a
different candidate behavioral module if
we look at pattern B these are the
periods in which that behavioral that
potential or
hypothetical uh behavioral module might
be in control of the robot and they plot
exactly that just by watching the robot
those hypothetical modules don't seem to
correspond to the real modules and so on
so you can go through the rest of these
the takeaway from this very compli ated
figure is whatever modules the way in
which Evolution has carved up the
overall behavior of cleaning up the
arena here doesn't seem to map any of
the ways we might carve up this task
into
subtasks
okay uh here they had a look at uh as
we've seen several times before how this
robot how the evolved controllers do
when they replay that controller on the
robot at novel locations they put the
robot at new positions inside the arena
how well does the evolved Behavior
generalize to new
situations they looked at a total of
7200 new situations they placed the
robot near an object near an object near
an object or the wall with the robot at
180 different uh horizontal angle so
maybe it's facing it's near an object
and it's facing the object or it's near
an object and facing a away from an
object and so on and they did that at 20
different distances of the robot away
from either an object or the wall and
they set it in that situation with
either uh its gripper already gripping
uh an object or not so it gives a total
of
7200 uh trials uh if you look at just
the uh errors here these were the number
of errors that the robot made what
counts as an error uh the error might be
the robot is holding an object over the
edge of the Arena the right thing to do
would be to drop it an error would be to
back up and keep the object in the
environment or an error might be the
robot is close to an object facing that
object and isn't currently holding an
object the right thing to do would be to
go forward and pick that object up if it
doesn't that counts as an error so if
you just look at these four black bars
here you'll see that the black the B bar
and the E bar are lower than the other
two I have absolutely no idea why they
didn't plot this information for C maybe
this was just uh an
oversight so uh e is doing pretty well
and B is also gen for some reason
generalizing pretty well as well and B
is the neural network that contains
internal neurons but no
modularity okay um this PL these sets of
plots over here we're going to take a
few minutes to walk our way through them
um these were all generated by a single
evolved EC controller an EC controller
that did very well on board the robot
during Evolution and during Evolution
the robot never made a mistake whenever
it was near an object and wasn't holding
one it would turn and pick it up
whenever it was holding an object and it
was near a wall it would drive to that
wall and drop it over the
edge they're going to play back uh the
robot using this e controller a very
large number of times again actually
these are all 7200 cases so every pixel
in these upper four panels corresponds
to one of those
7200 possible situations okay let's see
how to read this we've got four
different we can break those 7200
situations down into four buckets
there's the case where the robot uh is
near a wall and its gripper is empty
there's the case where the robot is near
a wall and its gripper is full
an A C cylindrical object and its
gripper is empty and a fourth and final
situation where the robot is near a
cylindrical object but it's already
holding an object on the horizontal axis
here they're showing the angle of the
robot relative to the wall That's nearby
or the robot's relative angle head its
relative angle relative to the
cylindrical object that's nearby an
angle of zero means the robot is facing
that wall or facing that cylinder headon
a value of 180 means that robot is
facing away from the object uh near the
object or the cylinder so the wall or
cylinder is nearby but it's directly
behind the robot and every else in
between so as we March left or right
along any of these four panels we're
thinking about the robot oriented
differently relative to the object
that's nearby a cylinder or the
wall the vertical axis represents how
close the robot is to either that wall
or that cylinder so if we think about
wall gripper empty this particular pixel
here the robot is facing the wall head
on and it is very very close to the wall
up here top Center this is the robot
facing the wall but the wall is pretty
far away from the front of the robot
okay make sense okay so for every single
Pixel and there you have to trust me
there are 7200 pixels in these four
panels they painted the pixel white if
uh sorry they painted the pixel black if
the robot in that situation triggered or
the controller in the robot in that
situation triggered the pickup behavior
and you'll notice there is a small patch
of black here so the robot immediately
starts to trigger the pickup Behavior if
the robot is facing a cylinder head on
and that cylinder is very close makes
exactly makes sense right this this
particular patch out of all these other
patches this is exactly the conditions
under which the robot should attempt to
grasp the
cylinder the gray pixels correspond to
this uh the Set uh the subset of those
7200 situations in which the robot AR uh
immediately tried to do the release
behavior that also makes sense this
patch in here corresponds to those
situations in which the robot is facing
facing the wall and the wall is
nearby and the gripper is full sorry I
forgot to mention that that also is
important so these are the situations in
which it's literally holding uh the
cylindrical object outside the wall and
it's facing the wall white pixels
correspond to neither the pickup
Behavior nor the release Behavior being
triggered okay so that's uh this is a
robot that seems to be doing exactly the
right thing in doing exactly the right
thing in all of those 7200 situations
with maybe the exception of this little
patch here in this case the robot should
be dropping the cylinder and it isn't so
arguably it's not perfect
these four panels exactly the same as
these four panels up here but the the
data in these four panels was generated
by a different evolved controller one
that also uh that never made mistakes
during Evolution but when exposed to
these 7200 situations it did make a few
mistakes and I'll give you a moment to
look at these the this data to see if
you can spot where the problem is where
it's making
mistakes it's doing the right thing here
it's facing the wall its gripper is full
and it's dropping the object it's doing
the right thing over here it's facing a
cylindrical object close by and head on
and its gripper is empty it should
indeed try and pick up uh the object the
eror is over here in this case the robot
is uh very close to a cylinder there's a
cylinder just front right of it and it's
very close to it but its gripper is full
what does it do in this case there's a
small patch of gray meaning it triggers
the release Behavior it's already
holding an object there's a second
object front right and it drops the
object that it's holding not the right
thing to do okay I want you to keep your
eye on this part of the slide I'm going
to switch back and forth to a different
slide now but I want you to watch this
situation remember that this patch of
pixels corresponds to situations in
which the robot is holding an object
there's an object uh just off its for uh
uh just in front and to the right of it
and it's dropping the
object this plot again these four panels
correspond to exactly the same situation
in this case every black pixel is uh
which of those 7200
situations that controller encountered
during
Evolution every white pixel are
situations that that e controller never
saw during uh Evol ution as you can see
most of the pixels are white meaning the
more at least more than 50% of the 7200
possible situations the robot can
encounter its EC controller causes it to
behave in a way that it doesn't
encounter those other situations this is
an important point that we haven't
brought up before is that one of the
things that a neural controller for a
robot does or a biological brain does
for an organism is keep that robot or
that that organism out of all possible
situations so you'll notice if we go
back to looking at this particular patch
here the place where we forced that
robot or we forced that controller into
that those these situations down here
that controller never allowed the robot
to see those situations during
Evolution makes sense right it's never
seen these situations before so there's
no guarantee that it's going to do the
right thing after Evolution when we
deploy it out in the real world and it's
going to experience a wider range of
situations than it ever saw during
Evolution okay so to summarize this
experiment um the experiment was a
success in the sense that they were able
to evolve a neural controller that found
a way to modularize the brain of the
robot and they were able to find that um
neural modularity in that case is
actually useful so what the evolutionary
algorithm determined or what it sort of
coded into the brain of the robot were
actually four different things first of
all uh the evolved controllers
determined which sensor States would be
experienced by the robot while moving
and that's the figure that we just saw
this particular evolved controller only
allows the robot to see these situations
a different evolved controller allows
the same robot to see or experience a
different subset of all possible
experiences Evolution determined whether
a behavior should be divided into
modules or not if uh if evolution had
tuned the synaptic weights here so that
the selector neurons never uh change
their relative uh magnitudes it would
basically be Evolution saying I know
you've allowed me to switch between to
evolve and then switch between modules I
don't need the modules I'm just just
going to stick with a certain set of
connections from sensors to
Motors Evolution also determined uh so
Evolution did did break these up into
modules by evolving the synaptic weights
that go from the sensor neurons to the
black selector
neurons what exactly uh the motor neuron
was forced to do when those different
modules were in charge was set by the
evolved weights of the synapses that
flow from the sensor neurons to the
white output neurons so Evolution found
modules and then figured out what the
robot should be doing differently in
those different
modules uh uh and I'm and sorry what
situation should trigger those modules
and what each module should do how it
should control the robot's Behavior so
uh what experiences the RO Evolution
determines what experiences the robot
should have whether it should have a
modular brain and it
should what situations what
environmental situations trigger which
modules which modules are in charge at
any given
time and then finally what those modules
do when they control the
robot okay that concludes our discussion
of uh modularity as it relates to
robotics uh next time we'll move on to a
different open challenge in robotics
which also has to do with the neural
controller for our robots and we'll see
a very famous solution to that problem
but maybe not the final solution to this
problem until then thank you